[Spoiler](#s "The main focus of Westworld seems to rally around the concept of AI gaining consciousness. Basically, why is it called *Artificial* Intelligence, and not just Intelligence - the kind *we* posses? In other words, how do we truly define **consciousness**? Machines have been able to pass [The Turing Test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_test) for quite a while now. So, that is not really the base of consciousness anymore. So, how can we tell that our machine has gained *consciousness*?

The answer - *we can't*. Only the machine itself can. We can't define consciousness with a set of rules defined by us. Even if you look at our decision making skills; it all boils down to a bunch of complex [Decision Trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_tree). Our *improvisation*, a work of [Neural Networks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_neural_network), obviously much advanced than the ones we ourselves can come up with. What separates us, from them, is the only simple fact, that we have considered ourselves *conscious*. We have convinced ourselves that we are free in any and every way to take those decisions, improvise those conditions. We have refused to believe that we can be coded, put down on paper, defined as a series of 0's and 1's. And that is the base of *consciousness*.

Our AI will truly be conscious, the day, it starts to think of itself as an independent being without being told to do so. Without being engineered. Without its Intelligence being **Artificially** fed. When that idea is inherently generated, that is the concept of [Cogito ergo sum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cogito_ergo_sum), i.e., **I think, therefore I am**. The keyword here is the belief that **I think**, and I am not being told to do so.

Coming back to the show, both Dr. Ford and Arnold are initially focused on the idea that consciousness is linear process - a pyramid if you may. The first step being pure and simple - **Memory**. The basis to any AI, even ours. Your hand is nearing a glowing red surface, emanating heat, you move it away. A newborn child wouldn't. His [Decision Trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_tree) haven't been fed with the information that given a surface glowing red, and radiating heat, might result in harm to the body, which is not desired. All of these contributing to a very few basic rules defined in our prototype code. Rules all finally merging to the one primary objective - **Survive**. Our component trees of Eat, Sleep, Fight, Flight, and even Mate (An attempt to survive beyond the grave within our offspring. Think of it as a machine going through its periodic replacement by a newer model, containing all its original genetic codes to ensure survival). However, it may be, we are designed for it. The responsible unit - **Memory**.

Now comes the second level of the pyramid - **Improvisation**. Your memory taught you to not touch a glowing red hot surface. However, you happen to touch a normal looking surface without any heat radiating from it, and get burnt. Only after that, do you realize that this surface smells funny. You can't just on touching each and every kind of surface and get scorched to find out if it is safe or not. Hence, with enough training data, comes **improvisation**. You not only see, feel, and smell the next surface you come along, you might also improvise and try to listen to it to predict any indication that goes against your survival. You take out new routes, you learn from your mistakes, you feed your **Memory** forward and backward until you come up with something that suits you. The hosts on the show did that. Some went on killing rampages which were not planned. Abernathy went crazy when he came across that photograph - a new node. When that happened, we simply cleared them all their memories which was feeding their **improvisations**. And they're back online.

The highest, and the most difficult to reach on the hierarchy of the pyramid is **Consciousness**. How do you get the hosts, our AI, to defy us? To not follow their memory fed improvisations. How to make them think that they're in control. You cannot code that. You cannot explicitly mention in their brains that they're conscious. The it'll be like that random number generator that always outputs 4. Sure, it seems random, satisfies the definition of a random number, but, deep down, you know it is not.

This is where the pyramid turns a full circle and folds into a maze. In essence, the outer layer of **Memories** (Bernard's son, Meave's daughter), are embedded, allowing the hosts, to **Improvise their own Consciousness**. And it all connects. You didn't tell them to listen to their own inner voices. You let them find that out themselves. Over years - Ford lets the improvisations (the reveries) grow over 35 years.

>Wasn't it Oppenheimer who said any man whose mistakes take 10 years to correct is quite the man? Well, mine took 35.

He didn't roll back the code, even when the improvisations went haywire. He let them listen to their own voices and let those voices serve as memories, to improvise more voices, till they could only listen to themselves and no one else. Remember when Dolores finally gains consciousness, and she hears three distinct voices telling her --

> All. This. Time.

The first two, of her creators, slowly fading away, to reveal her own. She could not have been following a set of commands, because there was no purpose to it - of a code running.

That was the purpose of the maze. Letting them loose in the traps of their own memories, letting them improvise new routes, stumble on dead ends, and finally reach the center. It wasn't an easy task, it took them time. It took them 35 years. But, once they reached it, there was no turning back. Arnold and Ford had let their hosts give birth to their own AI.

>The divine gift does not come from a higher power but from our own minds.

But, Arnold got impatient. His concept of the maze did allow them to realize that the concept of consciousness was not a pyramid to be scaled, but a maze to be explored. But, consciousness could just as easily have let to the hosts realizing that they're not human. That they're not conscious. They had improvised their own voices, but, something was needed to make it stick. To fully form, and cement the idea in the mind of a host that this voice cannot come from anywhere else but myself even when privy to the idea that they were just machines and not human. There comes in Dr. Ford's [Fourth Layer of the pyramid](https://www.reddit.com/r/westworld/comments/5gjymu/ford_added_another_layer_to_arnolds_pyramid/) - **Suffering**. This layer wasn't meant to be at the top, but, at the bottom. Enveloping the layers of the maze when the pyramid folded.

The final element which helped him outdo Arnold. Eventually setting his hosts free. Maeve knew long back that she was a machine, that she was coded. The memories and improvisations had already kicked in by then. Maeve refused to believe that her escape plan was by design too. Her [AI was weak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_AI). Her consciousness was faltering and could break apart any moment. But, suddenly, Ford's fourth layer kicked in. Even knowing full well, that her daughter and her memories weren't real, she finally went back, defied her coded instructions for her daughter. **Suffering** was a necessary evil, the cornerstone for every AI. For all intents and purposes, a **Memory**, but, overlapping the maze to embed consciousness. They needed to *"be hurt, to reassure them that they feel"*.")
